<!--
Copyright (C) 2024 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)

SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-or-later
-->
# Meta-Learning State Space Models

This repository includes source code for training and evaluating meta-learning for system identification and control via neural state-space models, proposed in IFAC World Congress paper:

```
@article{chakrabarty2023meta,
  title={Meta-learning of neural state-space models using data from similar systems},
  author={Chakrabarty, Ankush and Wichern, Gordon and Laughman, Christopher R},
  journal={IFAC-PapersOnLine},
  volume={56},
  number={2},
  pages={1490--1495},
  year={2023},
  publisher={Elsevier}
}
```

## Table of contents

1. [Installation](#installation)
2. [How to run](#how-to-run)
3. [Included datasets](#included-datasets)
4. [Pre-trained model weights](#pre-trained-model-weights)
5. [Contributing](#contributing)
6. [Copyright and license](#copyright-and-license)

## Installation

Clone this repo and create an anaconda environment. Then in that new environment, pull the repository and install the dependencies:
```sh
git clone https://github.com/merlresearch/meta-learning-state-space
cd meta-learning-state-space && pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## How To Run

1. Activate the correct environment.
2. Run `v1_train_metaLearn_fomaml.py` with `first_order=True` for first-order MAML (FO-MAML), and `first_order=False` for classical MAML
3. (Optional) Run `v1_train_supervised.py` for supervised learning with limited dataset.
4. (Optional) Run `v1_train_universal.py` for supervised learning with all tasks dataset (same data as MAML).
5. Run `v1_test_metaLearn_fomaml.py` to compute MAML/FO-MAML performance metrics on arbitrary test data, and `v1_test_benchmark_fomaml.py` to compute MAML/FO-MAML performance on nonlinear Bouc-Wen benchmark.
6. Base-learner network architecture can be changed inside `networks` directory. Default base-learner is `KoopmanNetMixed`.
7. All relevant data is in the `data` directory. Pre-trained weights are in the `saved_weights` directory. More information on these directories is provided below.

## Included datasets

This directory contains the data used for training and testing the meta-learning models. The specific files include:

- `train_data/BoucWen.MetaLearn.TrainTestDataset.Simple.mat`: This contains the dataset used for meta-training. The dataset $\mathfrak D_{\sf train}$ contains data from $N_{\sf train}=100$  Bouc-Wen systems with 7 parameters ($m_L$, $c_L$, $k_L$, $\alpha$, $\beta$, $\gamma$, $\delta$), where for each system, the parameters are selected via uniform sampling within $\pm$50\% of the nominal parameter values. Each system is simulated for $T=12$s at $750$Hz sampling. The excitation $u=120\sin(2\pi t)$ for all systems. The script `v1_test_metaLearn_fomaml.py` is a sanity check to ascertain the quality of the meta-inference on a system within $\mathfrak{D}_{\sf train}$. This dataset was generated by MATLAB R2024a.

- `test_data/BoucWen.BenchmarkDataset.mat`: This is the benchmark dataset proposed in https://www.nonlinearbenchmark.org/benchmarks/bouc-wen. We have ensured no system in the meta-training set has these benchmark parameters. The first 20% of that 40960-sample noisy benchmark dataset is assumed available as $\mathfrak D_{\sf test}$. The final 80% of the output trajectory is to be predicted by adaptation, which is implemented in `v1_test_benchmark_fomaml.py`. This data is available at: https://data.4tu.nl/articles/_/12967592.

## Pre-trained model weights

This directory contains pre-trained weights for the meta-learning models. The specific files include:

- `benchmark/maml_v1_benchmark.pt`: Weights obtained after meta-inference or adaptation phase of MAML meta-model on the Bouc-Wen benchmark data.
- `benchmark/fomaml_v1_benchmark.pt`: Weights obtained after meta-inference or adaptation phase of FO-MAML meta-model on the Bouc-Wen benchmark data.
- `benchmark/reptile_v1_benchmark.pt`: Weights obtained after meta-inference or adaptation phase of Reptile meta-model on the Bouc-Wen benchmark data.
- `metatest/maml_v1_test.pt`: Weights obtained after meta-inference or adaptation phase of MAML model on the meta-testing (randomly varying parameters, not benchmark) systems.
- `metatest/fomaml_v1_test.pt`: Weights obtained after meta-inference or adaptation phase of FO-MAML model on the meta-testing (randomly varying parameters, not benchmark) systems.
- `maml_v1_final.pt`: Weights obtained during meta-training the MAML model on the meta-training systems.
- `fomaml_v1_final.pt`: Weights obtained during meta-training the FO-MAML model on the meta-training systems.
- `competitors/reptile_metatrain.pt`: Weights for the Reptile meta-model trained on on the meta-training systems. This model is trained in the `v1_train_metaLearn_reptile.py` script.
- `competitors/universal_learned_model.pt`: Weights for the universal model trained on _all_ meta-training systems. This model is trained in the `v1_train_universal.py` script.
- `competitors/supervised_learned_model.??percent.pt`: Weights for the supervised model trained greedily on the benchmark system. This model is trained in the `v1_train_supervised.py` script and the percentage of benchmark system data seen by the model is described in the title of the weight e.g. 20 or 80.

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for our policy on contributions.

## Copyright and license

Released under `AGPL-3.0-or-later` license, as found in the [LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md) file.

All files, except as noted below:

```
Copyright (C) 2024 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)

SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-or-later
```

The following files:

- `maml/base_learner.py`
- `maml/maml.py`
- `maml/utils.py`

was taken without modification from https://github.com/learnables/learn2learn/ (license included in [LICENSES/MIT.md](LICENSES/MIT.md))

```
Copyright (c) 2019 Debajyoti Datta, Ian Bunner, Praateek Mahajan, Sebastien Arnold

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
```

The dataset:

- `data/test_data/BoucWen.BenchmarkDataset.mat`

was taken without modification from https://data.4tu.nl/articles/_/12967592 (license included in [LICENSES/CC-BY-SA-4.0.md](LICENSES/CC-BY-SA-4.0.md))

```
Copyright (c) 2020 by Jean-Philippe Noël, Maarten Schoukens

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
```
